 Syllabus

Data Science 101 :
Offered Autumn and Spring 2017-2018.

(5 units)

This course will provide a hands-on introduction to statistics and data science. Students will engage with the fundamental ideas in inferential and computational thinking. Each week, we will explore a core topic comprising three
lectures and two labs (per module), in which students will manipulate
real-world data and learn about statistical and computational
tools. Students will engage in statistical computing using the R language.

The objectives of this course are to enable students to:

(1) connect data to underlying phenomena and to think critically about conclusions drawn from data analysis, and
(2) be knowledgeable about programming abstractions for data analysis so that they can later design their own computational inferential procedures.
  
Instructors

Jonathan Taylor

    Office: Sequoia Hall #137
    Phone: 723-9230
    Email jonathan.taylor@stanford.edu
  

Lucy Xia

    Office: Sequoia Hall #244
    Phone: 497-8146
    Email lucyxia@stanford.edu


Pete Mohanty

     Office: Sequoia Hall #202
     Phone:
     Email pmohanty@stanford.edu

Weekly topics:

        Week 1: Introduction to Data Science- real world examples of
          past and present applications of data science
        Week 2: Data munging and wrangling   -the  R language, R markdown, R studio
        Week 3: Summarizing Data- mean, median, quantiles, missing
          data, outliers
        Week 4: Visualizing Data- informative graphics, histograms,
          boxplots, graphical perception
        Week 5: Sampling variability- the data as a sample,
          resampling, bootstrapping
        Week 6: Some inference: hypothesis tests and resampling-
          permutation and bootstrap hypothesis testing
        Week 7: Regression models and prediction- defining and fitting
          models, regression to the mean; residuals
        Week 8: Principal components analysis- linear combinations
          with  highest variation;  proportion variance explained
        Week 9: Nonparametric inference- model-free approaches to the
          analysis of data
        Week 10: Data snooping and multiple comparisons:  type I
          errors; multiple testing; False discovery rates




Schedule & Location MTWRF 9:30-10:20,  Building 200, room 205


Course Level: Undergraduate. Freshmen and sophomores especially
encouraged to attend.  No prerequisites. Enrollment cap in Fall 2016: 80, in Spring 2017: 150.


Prerequisites

Some familiarity with elementary algebraic notation at the high school level is assumed, but there is no calculus prerequisite.


Course organization

There will be three lectures per week  and two labs.
  



Evaluation

   There will be weekly homework assignments.
A typical assignment may take the following form: a question,
(e.g. a social or scientific question), and a data set which
students can analyze to provide possible answers to the question.

The final exam will be a take-home analyses of real data.

The course grade will be determined on the basis of:

* weekly homework assignments (60%) (worst grade will be dropped).
* final in class exam (40%).



